NH Grade1 textbook
Hi, English! 
P4
*Good morning, Takashi. Good morning, Jill. How are you? I'm fine, thank you. And you? I'm OK. 

P5
*Stand up. Sit down. Raise your hand. Open your book to page four. Close your book. Look at this picture. Listen to the CD. Repeat after me. Let's read together. Write this down. Quiet, please. Say that again. Pardon me? Excuse me. What's noto in English? 
 
 
Hi, English!
P8
*Today is Monday. First, Japanese. Second, music. Third, English. Fourth, science. Fifth, math. Sixth, geography. 

P9
*My birthday is March 3. When is your birthday? My birthday is May 5. 

 
 
P10
*I like spaghetti. Do you like spaghetti? Yes, I do. No, I don't. But I like pizza. I can play soccer. Can you play soccer? Yes, I can. I can play soccer. No, I can't. But I can play baseball. 
 
 
Unit1
P22
*Good morning, everyone. Good morning. I'm Ellen Baker. B-A-K-E-R. Call me Ms. Baker. OK. 

P24
*Are you Ando Saki? Yes, I am. Call me Saki, please. Oh, a judo uniform. Are you in the judo club, Saki? Yes, I am. 
 

P26
*Are you from America? Yes, I am. Are you from New York? No, I'm not. I'm from Boston. So are you a Boston Red Sox fan? Yes, I am. 
 
 
Unit2
P30
*Ms. Baker, this is your pen. Oh, yes. That's my pen. Here you are. Thank you. You're welcome. 

P32
*This is a nice picture! Is this Mt. Fuji? Yes, it is. Is that an amusement park? No, it's not. It's a “depato”. In English, it's a department store. Oh!  A department store. 
 
 
P34
*Ms. Baker, this is Alex. He's my friend. He's from Canada. Alex, this is Ms. Baker. She's our English teacher. Hi, Alex. Nice to meet you. Nice to meet you, too. That's a nice T-shirt. Thank you. 
 

Unit 3
P38
*Hi, my name is Deepa Mitra. I’m from India. I’m twelve. I like math. I study it every day. I like music, too. I play the guitar in a band. 

P40
*Do you practice the guitar every day? Yes, I do. I practice at home. Do you play the piano, too? No, I don’t. But I sing. Really? Do you write original music? Yes, I do. 
 

P42
*Do you like baseball? No, I don’t. I don’t play baseball. I play soccer. Do you know about judo? Yes, I do. But just a little. I’m a member of the judo club. I go to judo school every Sunday, too. I want a black belt. 
 
 
P46　Unit4 
*Excuse me. I want two lemons, three peaches, and two packs of cherries, please. Is that all? Yes. OK. Nine hundred and eighty yen, please. Here you are. Thank you very much. Here’s your change. Twenty yen. 

Ｐ48
*Do you have any pets now? No, I don’t. But my parents have some rabbits in Boston. Oh, really? How many rabbits do they have?  Three. Do you have a picture?  Yes. Here’sone. 

P50
*Oh, we have too much. Here. Take a doggy bag, everyone. A doggy bag? Look. We put food in it, and we take it back home. Oh, I see. Let’s use the doggy bags! 

Ｐ54　Presentation 1
*Hello, I’m Ikeda Shin. My favorite subject is English. I don’t like math, but I study it every day. My name is Kudo Kana. I like volleyball. I’m on the volleyball team. I practice it very hard. 

Ｐ58　Unit 5
*Kota, what’s this?  It’s a recipe for curry. What’s this? Is it chocolate?  No, it’s not. It’s a block of curry. Really? We don’t use that in my country. 

Ｐ60
*How’s the curry?  It’s delicious! You’re a great cook. Thank you. The recipe is not difficult. That’s good. India is famous for curry, right?  Yes. We usually eat it with our fingers. Really? That’s interesting. 

Ｐ62
*What do you have for breakfast? I often have toast and milk. How about you? I have rice and miso soup. Really? I also have an egg, natto, and tofu. Oh, you eat a lot! I’m hungry in the morning. 

Ｐ64　Daily Scene 1
*Erika, how are you today? Not so good. What's wrong? I have a headache. Take this medicine, and take a rest. Thank you, Dad. 
 

Unit 6
P66
*Hello, everyone. I’m Ando Saki. Look at this picture. This is Haruki, my brother. He lives in Australia. He studies at a university there. He speaks English really well. He sometimes teaches Japanese. 

P68
*Does Haruki live near a beach? Yes, he does. He lives in Gold Coast. The city has many beautiful beaches. Does he go to the beach every day? No, he doesn’t. But he goes there on weekends. What does he do there? He runs, swims, and surfs with his friends. 
 

P70
*Do you know the animals of Australia? I know koalas and kangaroos. Well, they come into the backyard of our house. Really? Yes. My sister often draws the koalas in the trees. Does Haruki like koalas, too? I don’t know. Usually, he doesn’t talk about animals. 
 

Daily Scene 2
P72
*Hello? Hello, Erika? This is Yun-ho. Oh!  Hi, Yun-ho. Are you free on Saturday? It's my birthday. Yes, I'm free. My party starts at three. Great. See you then. Goodbye. Bye. 
 

Unit 7
P76
*This is a picture of my home in Brazil. Who’s this girl? She’s Maria, my daughter. She likes soccer. She’s very cute. How old is she? Is she in junior high school? Well, this picture is old. She’s twenty-seven years old now. Really! 

P78　
*Do you call your family in Brazil? Yes, sometimes. The time is different. What time is it there now? It’s 4 a. m. And the season is different, too. What season is it? It’s fall in Japan, so it’s spring in Brazil. That’s interesting. 
 

P80
*What language do people in Brazil speak?  English? We speak Portuguese. But you speak English well. Does Maria speak English, too? Yes. Her English is very good. She plays soccer in America now. Wow. Which do you speak at home, English or Portuguese? Of course, Portuguese. 

 

Daily Scene 3
P82
*Dear Yun-ho, Happy Birthday! And many happy returns of the day. Love, Erika
 

Unit 8 
P84
*Oh, I’m late! Where’s my dictionary? It’s under the books. Where’s my eraser? It’s by the computer. Where are my pencils? They’re in your pocket. 

P86
*Kota, you’re late. I’m sorry. Hi, Jane. Look. Do you know this book? Oh, that’s Harry Potter. Is it yours? Yes, it’s mine. I like this book. I like that one, Winnie-the-Pooh. Whose book is that? It’s Saki’s. 
 

P88
*Do you know any other good books? How about The Tale of Peter Rabbit? It’s a story of a naughty rabbit. Oh, I know Peter Rabbit. I like him very much. The writer is Beatrix Potter. Do you know about her? No, I don’t. She’s very famous in the U. K. We love the nature and animals in her books. 

 

Daily Scene 4
P90
*Welcome to Midori International Junior High School! Our school is in Midori City, Japan. It’s 50 years old. We have about 200 students and 16 teachers. These are pictures from our school festival. We enjoy it every year. We love our school. 
 

Unit 9 
P94
*It’s almost noon. Mike, my brother, works in this Chinese restaurant. We’re waiting for him. Kota is drinking water. Deepa is watching the cook. Saki and Alex are talking about the menu. Oh, Mike is coming. 

P96　
*It’s very crowded. What are the people watching? They’re watching henmen, a traditional Chinese art. Wow!  The man is changing his masks so fast. Are you taking pictures, Kota? No, I’m not. I’m taking a video. Let’s check it out later. 
 

P98
*Kota, what do these Chinese words mean? Oh, they’re easy. Be careful. They’re not so easy. And don’t ask anyone. OK. Let’s check your answers. Oh, no!  Two of them are wrong. Well, don’t worry about it. 

 

Daily Scene 5　道案内
P100
*Excuse me. I'm looking for Midori Station. Pardon me? I'm looking for Midori Station. Let's see…Go down this street. Turn left at the second traffic light. It’s by City Hospital. Thank you. You're welcome. 

Presentation 2　一日の生活
P104
*I get up at seven. I leave home at seven fifty. I walk to school. I get to school at eight ten. We have lunch at twelve thirty. I play soccer after school. I usually study before dinner. I go to bed at about eleven. 
 

Unit 10
P106
*December 28Dear Ms. Baker,How are you? I am in a hotel in Boston with my family. Haruki is sleeping. He can sleep anywhere. But I cannot sleep tonight. I am so excited! I have an English book about Boston with me. I can read it with a dictionary. I like this city. Have a nice winter vacation and a happy new year! Your student, Ando Saki
 

P108
*This is Boston Common. We can skate there. Can you skate? Yes, I can. Let’s walk there. We can see some wonderful buildings on the way. Who’s that? Can you guess? No, I can’t. Who is he? He’s Benjamin Franklin. He’s one of the Founding Fathers of America. Oh, I see. 
 

P110
*Thank you for yesterday, Ms. Brown. Oh, that’s OK. Well, this museum has many works of Japanese art. Let’s go! Look at this picture. Can you find Mt. Fuji in it? Yes, I can. We love that mountain. A lot of people climb it. When can you climb it? Between July and September. We can’t climb it during winter. It’s dangerous. I see. Mt. Fuji in Boston. What a surprise! 
 

Daily Scene 6
P112
*Can I open the window? It’s hot. Sure. Can you help me with my homework? Sorry, I can't. I'm making tempura. Erika, dinner is ready. Can you set the table? OK. I'm coming. 
 

Unit11 思い出の一年
P116 
*The Japanese New Year. On New Year’s Eve, my friend and I enjoyed the Japanese way of life. We watched a music show on TV. And we tried some special soba. On New Year’s Day, we visited a shrine early in the morning. People clapped their hands and prayed. We clapped, too. We prayed for a good year. 

 

P118　　 
*Practice, Practice, PracticeOur soccer team has a good captain. He came to school early and practiced very hard. But he injured his leg. We went to the hospital and talked with him. He said,“Practice hard, and we can get the trophy. We’re a great team. ”  We practiced, practiced, practiced, and got the trophy. 
 

P120　　 
*Did you read my report? Yes, I did. I read it last night. You wrote about Boston. Yes. I had a wonderful time there. Where did you travel this winter?  I didn’t travel this winter. But I enjoy my life in Japan with you all. I enjoy your class, too. Thank you. I’m so happy. Well, have a nice day, Ms. Baker. See you tomorrow, Saki. 
 

Daily Scene 7
P122 
March 22Dear Yun-ho,
*I am in Shimane now. It took about one and a half hours by plane. I got up early this morning. I enjoyed breakfast with my family. We visited a big shrine. We saw many interesting things. It is raining now and a little cold. But Matsue is a beautiful city. I am having a great time. Your friend, Erika

P126 Presentation 3 
*We had our sports day in June. I can run fast. So I ran in the relay. Our team won first place. I enjoyed the day very much. 
 

Let’s Read
P128 
*The Restaurant with Many OrdersTwo hunters lost their way in a forest. They found a restaurant, Wildcat House. One hunter said, “I’m hungry. We can eat here. ”  They read a message on the door. It said, “We have many orders. Please understand. ”In the restaurant, the hunters saw many messages. The messages said, “Put your guns on the table,” “Take off your clothes,”and “Put salt and vinegar on your bodies…”
 

P129
*“That’s strange,” one hunter said. “We’re not making orders. Those messages are orders from this restaurant! ” “That means.... Oh, no! We’re the food! ”  Then the hunters saw two shiny eyes in two big keyholes of the door. “Those eyes are watching us! ”The hunters ran out of the restaurant. One hunter looked back and said, “Where is the restaurant? It’s not there. ” They stood alone in the forest. The wind blew over them. 


NH Grade2 Textbook
Unit0
P4
*Hello, everyone. I'm Ando Saki. I went to Fukui with my family two weeks ago. This is a picture of a dinosaur museum. You can get a lot of information about dinosaurs and natural history at the museum. We enjoyed delicious food, too. For example, we ate Echizen soba. We had a good time. Thank you. 

P5
*How did you get to Fukui? We went there by car. Can we see a tyrannosaurus in the museum? Yes, we can. How many hours did you spend at the museum? We spent three hours there! We saw a lot of dinosaurs. 
 
 
Unit1A Friend in a Sister School
P6
*Back-to-School Sale! Midori Stationery Shop is having a sale. This pen was 150 yen last week. Now it's 100 yen. Five notebooks were 500 yen. Now they're 400 yen. Don't miss this sale! 

P8
*Are you ready, Deepa? Our class starts in a few minutes. Just a second! …OK. Let's go. What were you doing? I was looking for my pencil case. Oh, did you buy that? It's nice. Thanks. I bought it yesterday at the back-to-school sale. 

 
P10
*April 20, 4:25 a. m. Hi. I'm Judy Smith from the United States. I'm in the seventh grade. My school starts in September and ends in June. Is it the same in Japan? My school has lots of fun events. Last month, we had a dance. Both students and teachers danced in the cafeteria on that day. It was fun! What events do you have at your school? 
 
 
P12
*I was surprised. Your school is different from ours. In Japan, the school year starts in April. You all look happy! Our school has fun events, like a chorus contest. Each class sings together on stage. You wrote your message at 4:25 a. m. Japan time. I was sleeping then! Now you're sleeping, right? We live far away from each other, but we can be friends. Let's keep in touch. 
 
 
Daily Scene 1 
P16
*Saturday, April 28I cleaned my room in the morning. After lunch, I went to the library and borrowed some books. In the evening, I watched a soccer game on TV. It was exciting. Sunday, April 29I went fishing at the Midori River With my friends. We caught many fish. Other people were fishing there, too. We gave some fish to them. We had a good time. 
 
 
Unit2
P18
*Hi, Deepa. What are your plans for the holidays? I'm going to visit the U.K. next week. My sister and I are going to see many things. Do you want anything from the U.K.? Kota

P20
*Show me your passport, please. Sure. Here you are. What's the purpose of your visit? Sightseeing. How long are you going to stay? For five days. Where are you going to stay? At my sister's house in London. I see. Enjoy your stay. Thank you. 
 
 
P22
*Look at that clock tower beside the Thames. It's about 150 years old. Many people call it Big Ben. Maybe the name comes from its builder, Benjamin Hall. He was a very big man. Now, we're going to ride that big Ferris wheel. It's about 20 years old. People call it the London Eye. It's 135 meters tall. We can see a great view from the toPIn London, we can find both old buildings and new ones. It's really interesting. 
 
 
P24
*Emi and I are at Oxford University now. It took about one hour from London to Oxford by train. Look. This is the dining hall. Maybe you know it from the Harry Potter movies. I love them. So I remember this hall from many scenes. Now I'm looking at the real thing. It's amazing. We can see so many things in our travels. The world is full of interesting places. 
 
 
Daily Scene 2
P28
*Excuse me. May I ask you a favor? Sure. Could you take our picture? All right. Say cheese! Could you take another one, please? No problem. 
 

Unit 3　Career Day
P32
*Don’t forget:□Wash your hands in the right way. □Look in the mirror to check your appearance. □Greet customers with a smile to welcome them. I’m here to learn about jobs in restaurants. 

P34
*Deepa, where did you go on Career Day? I went to an Italian restaurant. I want to be a chef. Wow. How was it? It was interesting, but I got tired. I tried to learn the whole menu, but I couldn’t. I see. I went to a newspaper company. I want to be a journalist. Sounds interesting. I want to hear about it. 
 

P36
*Kota and I went to a newspaper company on Career Day. Mr. Suzuki, a journalist, showed us around the office. Then he took us out to interview a soccer player. Mr. Suzuki told us, “Newspapers are important to people everywhere. We need to report the news every day. We have many things to do. ”Now I read newspapers every morning. For my future, I have many things to learn. 
 

P38
*I went to a soccer stadium to interview Miyama Aya. Mr. Suzuki, a journalist, took us there. Ms. Miyama played for some teams in the United States. I want to play soccer abroad in the future, too. So I asked her for some advice. She said, “You need to get along with your teammates. You need to break the language barrier. Get a lot of experience. It’s all about your heart. ”Her message impressed me. To play abroad is not easy, but I really want to try. 
 

Daily Scene 3
P42
*Hi, Erika. Guess what! We want to hold a farewell party for you. I’m going to invite our teachers, too. Do you have any plans next Sunday afternoon? Tell us your schedule. :-Your friend, Yun-ho
*Hi, Yun-ho. Thank you for the party. I’m so happy. Your plan surprised me very much. :-DI’m free on Sunday. I can’t wait! Bye for now, Erika

Presentation 1
P46
I want to be a computer programmer. I have two reasons. First, I like to surf the Internet. Second, I want to make useful websites. So the job is perfect for me. To be a good programmer, I study math, science, and English really hard. 
 

P48
Hello, everyone. I’m Kevin Parker. I’m from the United States. I’m going to talk about my dream. I love nature, and I like to hike in the woods. My favorite place is Yosemite National Park. It’s a World Heritage Site. It’s famous for its very tall trees. People call them giant sequoias. I really love the nature in Yosemite. So I want to be a park ranger there. Rangers work for the park to protect its environment. My cousin works as a ranger in Yosemite. She knows a lot about nature. So I often ask her about it. In the future, I hope to teach the importance of nature to the next generation. Thank you. 
 

Let’s Read 1 The Carpenter’s Gift
P50
Mary lived in the country. Ben, her neighbor, was a good friend. One day, they found a cow. Hey, that’s my cow. No, that’s my cow. What? Why do you think so? It has the same short legs as my other cows. No, Mary. It has the same long, black tail as my other cows. It’s mine. What are you saying? It’s my cow! After this little fight, Ben took the cow. 

P51
A week passed. Someone knocked at Mary’s door. Hello. Who are you? Hello. I’m a traveling carpenter. Please call me Pat. I’m looking for work. Do you have any work for me? Yes, Pat. Look at that small stream over there. Ben, my bad neighbor, made it last week. Oh, you sound so angry. Can you make a big fence along the stream? I don’t want to see his face. OK. No problem. 
 

P52
Pat worked hard and fast. At sunset, he finished his work. Mary came to see it. She was very surprised. What’s this? Well, I built a bridge over the stream. Why did you do that? Take down this bridge right now! Then the door of Ben’s house opened, and Ben came out of his house. Wait! Don’t take it down! 
 

P53
Ben ran across the bridge and came to talk to Mary. I’m sorry about the cow, Mary. Please take it back, and be my friend again. I don’t want to lose your friendshiPOh, Ben. I don’t want to lose yours, either. Well, the bridge worked! You both look very happy. Thank you, Pat. You built a “bridge” between us. Yes. Please stay here, Pat. We have a lot of work for you. Thank you, but I can’t. I have many other bridges to build. He left with a smile. 

Unit 4　Homestay in the United States
P54
Homestay Advice
You’re a member of the family. You have to follow the family’s rules. You have to speak English here. But you don’t have to speak perfect English. Communication is important. 

P56
Saki, did you sleep well?  Yes, thank you. Well, make your bed and come downstairs. Make my bed? Yes. We all have to make our own beds. OK. But I don’t know how. All right. I’ll show you. 
 

P58
Saki
Everyone in my host family is kind to me. But my host mother always gives me too much food. Do I have to eat everything, or can I tell her? 
Teacher’s answerYou must tell your host mother. Say, “I’m sorry. The food tastes delicious, but I can’t eat that much. ”She’ll understand. 
―――A few days later. ―――
Thank you for your advice. It worked! Now I can really enjoy my meals. 
 

P60
Carlo
I’m sad. My host family is very busy. They don’t take me anywhere, so I have nothing to do on weekends. Saki’s host family always takes her to interesting places. 
Teacher’s answerCarlo, you must not compare host families. Your family has its good points. Try to find them. They’re kind and interesting. Talk to them. 
―――A few days later. ―――
You’re right. I found my family’s good points. They try hard to talk with me. They like to laugh. Actually, they’re very friendly. Thank you. 
 

Daily Scene 4
P64-65
Hello? Hello?  This is Meg. May I speak to Erika, please? Sure. Just a second. Hi, Meg. What’s up? It’s warm and sunny today, so I’m going to ride my bike to the park. Why don’t you come? I’m sorry, but I can’t. I have to look after my neighbor’s children. Fine. Maybe some other time. 
 

Unit 5　 Universal Design
P68
Products for EveryoneThese are universal design products. You can use them easily and safely. If you are interested, we will send you a catalog. Our phone number is 5390-7416. 

P70
 I mistook the shampoo for the conditioner last night. I washed my hair twice. Did you know that shampoo bottles have bumps?  Bumps? No, I didn’t. It’s a universal design. What’s a universal design?  It’s a design for everyone. I think universal designs are great. 
 

P72
I used a wheelchair for the first time in my life today. When I sat in it, I couldn’t use it easily. I felt a little scared. I tried to get on a bus, but it was difficult. The bus door was wide. Even so, it was very hard. I needed a lot of helPI learned an important lesson from this experience. From now on, when I see someone in need, I’ll give them a hand. 
 

P74
Universal design products are all around us. For example, look at this plastic bottle. We can hold it easily because it has a special shape. Now, look at this picture. Do you see the ramp by the stairs? If you’re in a wheelchair, or pushing a stroller, you can use the ramPThese days, many public places use the idea of universal design. I think it’s great because the products are useful for everyone. 
 

Daily Scene 5
P78
Excuse me. Which bus goes to the Palace Theater?  The Palace Theater? Yes.  Take Bus No. 104. It stops over there. A bus arrives every ten minutes. I see. Where should we get off ?  Get off at 47th Street. How long does it take?  Oh... I think it takes about ten minutes. Thank you.  You’re welcome. 

Unit 6　Rakugo in English
P80
Come and Laugh! There is a single cushion on the stage. There are many seats for the audience. What will happen here? Rakugo in EnglishJapanese comic storytellingDATE December 10TIME 2:30 Pm. PLACE Midori Theater
 

P82
What is rakugo like? Well, one performer plays several different characters. Wow. Is there a special stage set? Yes, there is. But it’s simple. There’s only a cushion. Are there any props? Yes, there are. A fan and a hand towel. The performer uses them in different ways. 
 

P84
These days, rakugo is spreading to other countries. Their cultures are different, so rakugo performers change parts of the stories. Then, everyone can understand them. Laughter is a strong bridge. Some doctors think that laughter is also good for our health. They even hold rakugo shows for their patients. Now, enjoy listening to some classic rakugo stories in English. Relax and have fun! 
 

P86
In a cafeteria, three classmates are talking about scary things. I’m scared of snakes. Well, I’m scared of tests. Ha-ha. How about you, Mark? I’m scared of… donuts. I don’t even want to see them. Really? That’s interesting. [Eric buys some donuts. ]Here are your donuts, Mark! Oh, no! [Mark starts eating the donuts. ]Hey, you said you’re scared of donuts! Yes. Seeing donuts is really scary. So I’m eating them. Oh, I forgot to tell you. I’m scared of milk, too. 
 

Daily Scene 6　詩
P90
PicnicHappy faces Eating, talking, laughing Sunny sky above us Wonderful

P91
Hometown Pretty flowers Birds are singing Oh, my beautiful memories Forever
 

Presentation 2
P92　Hop
I live in Kumamoto City in Kyushu. Kyushu is in the southwest of Japan. My city is famous for Kumamoto Castle. Its main palace is popular. There are beautiful rooms, a great kitchen, a simple tea room, and so on. You can learn about history there. 
 

P94　Challenge
Hello, everyone. I’m Wang Meiling. Look at this picture. This is my town in Fujian, China. You can see some round houses. People call them Fujian Tulou. Don’t you think they look interesting? I live in one of these houses. It’s huge. There are about 350 rooms. About 300 people from 60 families live together in our house. I live there with my parents, grandparents, two uncles, three aunts, and three cousins. There are kitchens on the first floor, and food storage rooms on the second floor. There are living rooms and bedrooms on the third and fourth floors. If we are hungry, we have to go downstairs. I like my house and town because living together with a big family is fun. 
 

Let’s Read 2　Try to Be the Only One
P96
“Why did my grandmother die? Why did everyone leave me? ” cried a boy of fourteen. “I hate my father and mother. ”The sun was bright in the blue sky above him. But the boy could not see it because he was blind. The boy was born in 1952 in Okinawa. His father was Mexican-American and his mother was Japanese. Both of them left home when he was a baby. So his grandmother took care of him. 
 

P97
The boy’s name was Aragaki Tsutomu. He liked music very much. One day, he heard some hymns on the radio. He was interested in them. He wanted to hear some other hymns, and so he went to a church. At the church, he met the minister. Tsutomu told him about his life. The minister listened to him quietly. When Tsutomu stopped talking, he found that the minister was crying. “Oh, he understands me,” Tsutomu thought. 
 

P98
The minister said, “Tsutomu, do you want to come and stay with us? My wife and children will welcome you. ”Tsutomu felt happy and said, “Yes. ”Tsutomu started a new life as a member of the minister’s warm family. Tsutomu wanted to become a minister, too. So he went to college and studied very hard. He also learned singing and sang in church. His hatred of his parents began to fade. He decided to help other people in need. 
 

P99
Tsutomu’s Italian voice trainer once said to him, “Your voice is a gift from God, and also from your father. You’re the only one in the world with a voice like that. ”Tsutomu is now proud of his singing. His motto is “Try to be the only one, not just number one. ”We can feel the brightness and sadness of Okinawa through his beautiful voice in his song Sugarcane Fields. 
 

Unit 7　The Movie Dolphin Tale
P100　Starting Out
Let’s compare sea animals. The dolphin is larger than the tuna. But the tuna swims faster than the dolphin. The blue whale is the largest of all animals. It is longer than a 25-meter swimming pool! 

P102　Dialog
Thank you, Deepa. I love dolphins, so I really enjoyed your book. Oh, then you should see this movie, Dolphin Tale. It’s more interesting than this book. Really? Yes. Don’t miss the ending. That scene is the most impressive in the movie. OK. I’ll check it out. Let’s talk about the movie tomorrow. 
 

P104　Read and Think 1
Sawyer is a shy 11-year-old boy. One day, he sees a dolphin on a beach. The dolphin has a serious tail injury. Sawyer tries to help her. Soon some people from an aquarium come to rescue her. They name her Winter and take good care of her. Sawyer visits the aquarium every day to see her. Winter knows that Sawyer saved her life. So she looks happy when she sees Sawyer. Winter becomes his best friend. Winter looks happy, but her condition does not get better. 
 

P106　Read and Think 2
Winter’s injury is very bad. The doctor must cut off her tail. Without a tail, she’ll die. But making an artificial one is very expensive. People at the aquarium are sad, but they can’t do anything. Sawyer thinks of an idea. He plans a charity event with volunteers. Many people come, and Sawyer collects money for Winter. Sawyer is no longer shy. Finally, Winter gets a new tail. It’s the best thing for her. She can swim as well as other dolphins. This movie is a true story of the bond between people and animals. 
 

Daily Scene 7
P110～111
Hello. May I help you? Yes, please. I like these jackets. We have more in the back. What color are you looking for? Something bright. How about this orange one? Oh, that’s cool. But it’s too big for me. Shall I show you a smaller one? Yes, please. Oh, this is nice. How much is it? It’s sixty dollars. OK. I’ll take it. 
 

Presentation 3
P114　Hop
My favorite comic is Star TriPIt’s a science fiction story. A hero and his friends travel to the stars to search for treasure. It’s the most popular comic this year. I like it because there are many cool characters in it. If you’re interested, I can tell you more about it. 
 

P116　Challenge
Hello, everyone. I’m Anita Lopez from Venezuela. I like classical music. I like it because it’s very emotional. My family is poor, but I learn music thanks to a special program. The program is “El Sistema. ”In 1975, the government started it to help poor children in Venezuela. In this program, children can borrow instruments and become a member of an orchestra. The program is free. Can you believe it? Now El Sistema is one of the most famous educational programs in the world. More than 350,000 children are members. I joined the program five years ago. I play the violin. I really enjoy playing music with my friends in the orchestra. My life is happier than before. I think the power of music is great. 
 

P118　Let’s Read 3　Cooking with the Sun
Imagine that you live on a high mountain. There is no electricity or gas. You need to eat every day. So you have to find ways to heat and cook food. When you are in a place like this, you can use a solar cooker. You can also use one after a disaster. A solar cooker is a tool to heat food in a pot. It collects sunlight in the pot. It can cook rice, boil eggs, and even bake cakes. 
 

P119
A solar cooker is helpful to people in developing countries. Why? First, making a solar cooker does not cost much. You can make one with only cardboard and aluminum foil. Second, people in developing countries can get cleaner water by boiling it with a solar cooker. Drinking water from rivers and lakes is one of the biggest causes of disease. Third, a solar cooker is safe because it does not make smoke. More than one third of the people in the world burn firewood indoors to cook. A lot of children die from its smoke. 
 

P120
A solar cooker can solve another big problem because it does not use any fuel. People need a lot of wood to cook every day. Collecting wood is hard work, especially for women and children. With a solar cooker, they do not have to collect wood anymore. More than two billion people use wood to heat food. Cutting trees in forests adds to global warming. If you use one solar cooker, you can save about 550 kilograms of wood every year. 
 

P121
We use a lot of energy in our daily lives. We get most of this energy from gas and oil, but they are limited. A solar cooker uses solar power. It is an example of renewable energy. There are other examples of this energy, such as water, wind, and natural heat in the ground. Renewable energy facilities often cost a lot, but you may find a simple idea, like a solar cooker. Sometimes a simple idea has the power to change the world for the better. 


NH Grade3 Textbook
Unit0
P4
Hello, everyone. I'm Ito Kota. I'm going to talk about Canada. Look at the map and the table. Canada is north of the United States. It's the world's second largest country, but its population is only thirty-three million. There are many places to see in Canada, like Niagara Falls and Canadian Rockies. A lot of people go to Canada to enjoy its beautiful nature. I want to go and see it myself. Thank you. 
 
 
Unit1 Pop Culture Then and Now　　　
P6
This is a famous painting by Vincent van Gogh. It is loved by many people. Van Gogh was influenced by ukiyo-e. Some ukiyo-e prints are shown in this painting. They were brought from Japan to Europe. 
P8
Was this picture also painted by the same person? Yes, it was. When was it painted? Is the year written in the book? Yes. It was painted in 1887. I see. At that time, Japanese culture was popular in Europe. Really? How about now? 
 

P10
Japanese Pop Culture around the WorldJapanese manga and anime characters are loved in many countries. Doraemon is one good example. In 2012, he was given special birthday parties in Hong Kong and Taiwan. Many Doraemon fans celebrated his 100-year "before" birthday. Another popular example of Japanese pop culture is the word "kawaii". "Kawaii " is also used outside Japan now. A lot of people are attracted by kawaii culture such as Hello Kitty goods and other unique designs. 
 
 
P12
Friday, April 22I read about ukiyo-e and Japanese pop culture today. I knew little about them before, but I learned that both are much loved in foreign countries. It makes me proud of Japan. I also learned that ukiyo-e was pop culture in Japan during the Edo period. In fact, ukiyo-e prints were sold like posters. I think manga and anime will be traditional Japanese arts like ukiyo-e someday. Maybe even kawaii culture can become a part of Japanese tradition. This idea makes me happy. 
 
 
Daily Scene 1
P16
Help yourself, Erika. Thank you. Would you like some more? Yes, please. It's very good. I'm glad you like it. May I have some water? Of course. Here you are. This dish is delicious. What is it called? It's called meat loaf. It's made from beef. Would you like another piece of meat loaf? No, thank you. I'm full. 
 
 
Presentation 1
P18
This is called a yunomi. It's used when you drink tea. A yunomi usually doesn't have a handle. This yunomi is Arita ware from Saga Prefecture. There are many kinds of yunomi in Japan. Some of them are really beautiful. 
 
 
P20～L. 11
Hi, everyone. My name is Maile Johnson. I'm a high school student in Hawaii. Last summer, I met Sayuri, a 17-year-old Japanese student. She visited Hawaii to study English during her summer vacation. She stayed at our house for two weeks as a homestay student. We became very good friends. One day, she said to me, "Your father often wears aloha shirts to work. I like them. They're very Hawaiian. ""Yes, I like them, too. I also love Japanese clothes. I'm interested in Japanese kimonos, "I answered. 
 
 
P20　L. 12～
Actually, the first aloha shirts in Hawaii were made by people from Asia. They were made from Japanese kimonos. I told this story to Sayuri. It made her curious. "How were the kimonos brought from Japan to Hawaii?" she asked. Today aloha shirts are known around the world as example of Hawaiian culture. You can see them in many places. Cultures are mixing and the world is becoming smaller. Isn't that great? 
 
 
Unit2 From the Other Side of the Earth
P22
Hi, everyone! I'm Ricardo Takahashi from Rio de Janeiro. My grandfather is Japanese. I've lived in Japan for a month. I've loved Japanese anime since I was a little child. I watched some programs in Brazil. I'm glad I could finally come to Japan. 
 
 
P24
Hey, Kota. You're on the soccer team, aren't you? Yes. How did you know that? Paulo, your coach, told me about you. He taught me soccer when he was in Brazil. Really? How long have you known him? For about eight years. Now he often comes to our house in Japan. Wow. It's a small world! 
 
 
P26
Look at this picture. It looks like the sea, doesn't it? Actually, it's a river, the Amazon. It's the largest river in the world. The Amazon has been important to Brazil for many years. Its water power produces about eighty percent of Brazil's electricity. The Amazon has been helpful to everyone here, too. It runs through a huge rain forest. That forest produces about twenty percent of the world's oxygen. The oxygen in this classroom may come from Brazil! 
 
 
P28
The rain forest of the Amazon has many unique animals. These animals have been there for a long time, but they're losing their home now. People are destroying the rain forest. It has continued for years. Between the 1970s and 2010, about 740,000 square kilometers of the forest disappeared. That's almost twice the size of Japan. I've been worried about this problem since I was in elementary school. I want to become a scientist and do something for the plants and animals of the Amazon. The Amazon is treasure of the world. 
 
 
Daily Scene 2
P32
May 15 Dear Jiro, My name is Erika. I am a junior high school student in New York. I lived in Japan before, and I have been a big fan of yours since then. Today, I saw the game at Yankee Stadium. I was really impressed when you hit a home run. I have a question. You have been successful in the United States. What is your next goal? Please write back if you have time. I wish you the best of luck. From your biggest fan, Takigawa Erika
 

Unit 3　Fair Trade Event
P34
1. Have you ever heard of “fair trade”? Yes, I have. No, I haven’t. 2. Have you ever seen this mark? Yes. I’ve seen it before. No. I’ve never seen it before. Come and discover the world of fair trade. 

P36
Chocolates, coffee, clothes…. Are these all fair trade products? Yes. I’ve just taken a look at the pamphlet. It says more than fifty products are sold here. Have you looked at the prices yet? No, not yet. Have you? Yes. I’ve already checked some products. They seem a little expensive. Well, maybe the prices are “fair. ”
 

P38
Ghana produces a lot of cacao. It’s made into chocolate. Many cacao farm workers are very poor because cacao is sold at a low price. They work hard, but they can’t make enough money to live. They work under “unfair” conditions. Many children in Ghana have to work on farms to help their families. Some of them have never been to school. Fair trade can solve these problems. If you buy fair trade chocolate, more money goes to the workers. Your shopping choices can make a difference. 
 

P40
Hi, Alex. I enjoyed the event today. I’ve just tried some fair trade chocolate with my family. It was great. The children in today’s video don’t know that cacao is made into chocolate. They have never eaten chocolate themselves. I was surprised to hear that. What can we do for those children? I think choosing fair trade products is one way to support them. Learning about the people behind the products is another. I was glad to learn about fair trade today. I want to learn more. Your friend, Saki
 

Daily Scene 3
P44
Have you ever been to the Statue of Liberty? No, I haven’t. But I want to visit it someday. I’m going tomorrow. Would you like to come with me? I’d love to. When and where shall we meet? Let’s meet in front of your hotel at 10:30. Is that OK? At 10:30?  That’s perfect. I’m looking forward to it. OK. See you then. 
 

Presentation 2
P50
We went to Kyoto on a school trip in June. Kyoto is an old city with many traditional buildings. My favorite was Kinkaku-ji. One of my friends said, “I’ve never seen such a beautiful temple before! ”I thought it was beautiful, too. I also enjoyed talking with my friends at night. I’ll never forget this triP
 

P52
Hello, everyone. My name is Paavo Laitinen. I’m a junior high school student in Finland. I’ve lived in Helsinki for more than ten years. Last winter, we went to Lapland on a school triPLapland is a region in northern Finland. It has been popular among tourists for a long time because the nature there is really beautiful. On the trip, we enjoyed many activities. My favorite activity was a husky tour. We got on a sled, and huskies pulled it through the forest. It was very exciting. 
 

P52
Seeing an aurora was also one of the purposes of this triPHave you ever heard of auroras? We went to a vast snow field at night to see one. Fortunately, the weather was perfect. We could see a band of bright green lights in the sky. I said to myself, “I’ve never seen such a beautiful aurora before. ”I was very happy to see it. In Lapland, I could feel a sense of living within nature. We can’t experience that in a city. This has become the best memory of my junior high school days so far. 
 

P54Let’s Read 1
A Mother’s Lullaby
A big, old tree stands by a road near the city of Hiroshima. Through the years , it has seen many things. One summer night, the tree heard a lullaby. A mother was singing to her little girl under the tree. They looked happy, and the song sounded sweet. But the tree remembered something sad. “Yes. It was some seventy years ago. I heard a lullaby that night, too. ”
 

P55
On the morning of that day, a big bomb fell on the city of Hiroshima. Many people lost their lives, and many others were injured. They had burns all over their bodies. I was very sad when I saw those people. It was a very hot day. Some of the people fell down near me. I said to them, “Come and rest in my shade. You’ll be all right soon. ” 

P56
Night came. Some people were already dead. I heard a weak voice. It was a lullaby. A young girl was singing to a little boy. “Mommy! Mommy! ” the boy cried. “Don’t cry,” the girl said. “Mommy is here. ”Then she began to sing again. She was very weak, but she tried to be a mother to the poor little boy. She held him in her arms like a real mother. 

P57
“Mommy,” the boy was still crying. “Be a good boy,” said the girl. “You’ll be all right. ”She held the boy more tightly and began to sing again. 
After a while, the boy stopped crying and quietly died. But the little mother did not stop singing. It was a sad lullaby. The girl’s voice became weaker and weaker. Morning came and the sun rose, but the girl never moved again. 
 

Unit 4 To Our Future Generations
P58
This Week’s Evacuation DrillDo you know what to do in an emergency? In case of a fire, go outside. Walk fast. Don’t run. In case of an earthquake, cover your head first. Wait in a safe place until it stops. Learn how to protect yourself. 

P60
 It’s difficult for me to imagine a big earthquake. But one may happen at any time.  That’s true. So it’s necessary for us to prepare for disasters, right?  Yes. And I think it’s important to keep the past in mind.  What do you mean?  Well, I’ll tell you a story. 

P62
On March 11, 2012, there was a special violin performance in the city of Rikuzentakata. The audience listened closely to the sound of the violin. Some of the people were in tears. That violin was very special to everyone there. The violin was made by Nakazawa Muneyuki, a famous violin maker. After the earthquake hit Japan in 2011, he wondered how to help as a craftsperson. Then he came up with an idea. It was to make violins from driftwood from the disaster. 


P64
Though it was not easy to make a violin from the driftwood, Mr. Nakazawa created some beautiful violins. The violins have a tender sound with the power to heal people. They have been passed around to many musicians. As of January 2014, more than 200 musicians have played the violins. Millions of people have listened to them at concerts or on TV not only in Japan, but also around the world. “I want our future generations to play the violins, too,” said Mr. Nakazawa. “I want them to pass on the memories. ” 

Daily Scene 4
P68
 Excuse me. Could you tell me how to get to Kokuritsu-kyogijo Station? Sure. Take the Ginza Line to Aoyama-itchome, and change trains there.  I see. How many stops is Aoyama-itchome from here? Three stops.  Which line should I take from Aoyama-itchome? Take the Oedo Line. It’s the train on Track 2.  Thank you very much. My pleasure. 

Unit 5　Living with Robots ― For or Against
P70
Technology Meets TraditionLook at these robots playing the taiko drums. They were originally made as industrial robots. Now they are great musicians. Feel the traditional rhythms created by technology. 

P72
Are you interested in robots? Yes, especially robots made in Japan. Do you know what they can do? I heard some of them can walk, talk, and even kick a ball. That’s right. Not long ago, robots like those were just a dream. I know what you mean. Our dreams are becoming reality. Exactly. 

P74
Ms. Baker
Today, let’s talk about living with robots. Deepa, what do you think? 
DeepaI think robots make our lives better because they help us in many ways. Some robots can put together products, like cars or cameras. They do it quickly and precisely. Other robots can work in dangerous places instead of people. 
KotaI agree with her in part. The robots working for us are amazing. But there’s also a big problem. Robots are so efficient that they’re taking people’s jobs away. I’m worried about losing our future jobs. 


P76
Saki
Some robots work in hospitals and homes. I think they’re necessary for our future. The number of elderly people is increasing. Future robots may be able to help them when they take a bath, or go shopping. 
AlexThat’s true, but I’m a little afraid of living with robots. If they get out of control, we don’t know what they’ll do. Robots are machines. They’re too dangerous to be our partners. 
Ms. Baker
Thank you, everyone. In my opinion, you should keep thinking about the best way to live with robots. It’s our future. 

Daily Scene 5
P80
Hello? Hello, Mrs. Walker. This is Erika. May I speak to Meg, please? I’m sorry, she’s out. Do you want her to call you back? No, it’s OK. But can I leave a message? Sure. Could you tell her to come to my house at two? We’re going to do our papers together. OK. Your house at two. Yes. Thank you, Mrs. Walker. You’re welcome. Say hello to your parents for me. 
 

Unit 6　Striving for a Better World
P82
This is a book I brought from the United States. These are some of the people I found in it. They’re all winners of the Nobel Peace Prize. Is there anyone you’ve seen before? 

P84
I saw an impressive movie yesterday. What was it about? It was about the life of Aung San Suu Kyi. Is she the woman Ms. Baker talked about? Yes. She’s a political leader who fights for democracy and human rights in Myanmar. Sounds interesting. 
 

P86
Political LifeIn 1988, there was a movement for democracy in Myanmar. A great number of people who joined it were killed. People needed a strong leader, and asked Aung San Suu Kyi to join them. She accepted, and decided to work for her country. In 1989, the government put her under house arrest to stop the movement. She was locked up for 15 years in total, but she never gave uPIn 1991, she won the Nobel Peace Prize. It was a prize that attracted people’s attention. The world recognized her efforts for democracy and human rights. 
 

P88
Personal LifeIn 1999, Aung San Suu Kyi’s husband was dying of cancer. She wanted to visit him in the U. K. , but she could not leave her suffering people behind. In the end, she stayed in Myanmar and never saw him again. It was a sad decision that they made together. In 2010, she was finally set free. She is still fighting for a world that is “free from the displaced, the homeless, and the hopeless. ”The world that she wants may not come easily, but she keeps striving for it. 
 

Daily Scene 6
P92
Many Japanese students wear school uniforms, but most American students do not. I think that we should have school uniforms. These are my reasons. First, if we have school uniforms, we do not have to worry about what to wear every day. Second, having school uniforms saves us money on clothes. Third, when we wear school uniforms, we can feel that we belong to our school. 
7School uniforms are good for students in many ways. I think that we should also have school uniforms in the United States. 
 

P96　Presentation 3
I’ve been a member of the volleyball team for three years. At first, it was difficult for us to win a game, but we’ve improved a lot. I’ll never forget winning the city championshiPI’m going to keep playing volleyball. I want to be a player who can lead a team to the national tournament. 
 

P98 Challenge
Hi, everyone. I’m Takigawa Erika, a 15-year-old girl living in New York. I lived in Japan before, and moved here last year. In New York, I’ve met people from all over the world. There are students of various cultures in my school, too. It wasn’t easy for me to get along with them. But a class called “Filmmaking” has changed me. Filmmaking is an elective class that is very popular in my school. In the class, students work in groups and learn how to make their own movies. My group had four members who all had different ideas and opinions. So we discussed things a lot and sometimes argued. But as we were all working hard for the same goal, we came to accept one another. We brought different ideas together, and completed a wonderful movie in the end. This is the greatest experience that I’ve had in my school life. Filmmaking taught me to accept differences and learn from other people. I want everyone to learn the importance of respecting differences, and I believe there will be something I can do to helPI’m still not sure what I can do, but I hope my experiences will help me to find a way. 
 

P100　Let’s Read 2　The Green Door
Rudolf read the card. Only three words were written on it “The Green Door. ”  A man who also received a card threw his away in front of Rudolf. Rudolf picked it uPIt was just an advertisement for a dentist’s office. Rudolf wondered why and walked past the card man again. He got another card with the words “The Green Door. ”  Many cards were thrown away on the street, but they were all for the dentist. “Why did I receive these mysterious cards, not the dentist’s ones? ”Rudolf was sure that an adventure was waiting for him. 
 
 
P101
Behind the card man, Rudolf saw a building that had the dentist’s office and some shops on the first two floors. He entered the building and climbed to the third floor. There was a dark hallway. On the left, he saw a green door. He walked straight to the door and knocked. Slowly, the door opened. A young woman stood there. She was pale and weak. She began to fall, but Rudolf caught her in his arms and carried her to a sofa in the room. After a while, the woman opened her eyes. She was very beautiful, but also very thin. 
 

P102
The woman looked at Rudolf calmly, and smiled. “I fainted, didn’t I? ” she said. “I haven’t eaten for three days. ”“Oh, no! ” cried Rudolf. “Wait! I’ll be right back. ”He ran out of the room and came back with a lot of food. “It’s ridiculous to go without eating,” said Rudolf. The woman began to eat and told him about herself. Her story was nothing new. She got sick and lost her job. She ran out of money and stayed in her room without hope. Then she heard the knock on her green door. 
 

P103
“And you have no family or friends in the city? ” asked Rudolf. “No. Nobody,” answered the woman. “Oh, now I’m sleepy, but I feel much better. Thank you. ”Rudolf said, “Well, good night. I’ll come back tomorrow to see how you are. ”At the door, she asked, “But why did you knock at my door? ”Rudolf did not think that he should tell her about the cards. “By mistake,” he replied. He saw her smile as the door closed. Rudolf looked around more carefully in the hallway. He realized that every door on that floor was green. 
 

P104
Rudolf stepped out on the street and asked the card man, “Why did you give me these cards? ”The man pointed at a theater down the street and said, “They’re for a new show. I was handing them out with the dentist’s cards. ”Above the theater entrance, there was a big sign saying “The Green Door. ”  It was the title of a play. On his way home, Rudolf thought about his day. He said to himself, “Anyway, I believe fate guided me to her! ”There is always an adventure just around the corner... if you look for it. 

 

P106　Let’s Read 3　An Artist in the Arctic
One photograph changed Hoshino Michio’s life. He was a university student, and one day he was looking at a book about Alaska. A photograph in the book caught his attention. It was a photograph of a small village surrounded by wilderness. Michio wanted to visit and experience that place for himself. He wrote a letter to the mayor of the village. It took six months, but the mayor wrote back. He invited Michio to Alaska, and Michio’s dream came true. 
 

P107
For one summer, Michio lived among the Inuit people in that Alaskan village. He learned about Inuit food, family life, and culture. He also learned skills for living without city conveniences. For the Inuit, life depends on understanding nature. They have to hunt for meat and gather blueberries for food. Michio saw how humans and animals shared the land. That summer, he became a part of the Alaskan wilderness, too. 
 

P108
After Michio finished university in Japan, he returned to Alaska. For 19 years, he traveled around Alaska as a photographer. He often camped in severe weather to photograph animals in the wild. Michio really used the survival skills the Inuit taught him. Once he wrote about flying to the tundra to photograph caribou. He stayed there alone for one month. As the plane left him, Michio felt lonely in a vast wilderness. But even more, he felt incredibly free. 
 

P109
Michio tried to show this feeling of freedom and wonder in his photographs. He took playful photographs of polar bears and majestic photographs of Arctic mountains. In 1996, he was killed by a bear as he camped alone in Kamchatka. “We only have one life to live,” wrote Michio. Though his life was cut short, Michio seemed truly happy as a photographer. He loved his work and he loved Alaska. 
 

P110
In Michio’s photographs, the beauty of Alaska will stay with us forever. That is the magic of photographs. However, the Alaskan wilderness is changing because of global warming. The Arctic glaciers are melting. The polar bears and seals photographed by Michio cannot hunt and catch food. The habitat of the caribou is growing smaller. Even the Inuit are losing their traditional way of life. 


P111
The Alaskan wilderness was special to Michio. He used his photographs to share it with us, and to show us the importance of life on the Earth. Michio’s own life was changed because of one photograph. Perhaps his photographs will also change someone’s life. Maybe Michio’s Alaskan photographs will encourage us to think about the beautiful Earth we share. 




